And I want to begin by asking you to
imagine that you've just taken a trip to
Mars.
And you encounter on Mars a race of men
who are just like us in all physical and
psychological respects.
And you observe one peculiar thing about
them, namely that they walk around on
their hands only.
Uh this is utterly senseless. Their
hands are torn and bleeding. Their
hearts are pounding. Their faces are
flushed. This is a misery invoking
widespread insanity.
Your first question would be why? What
could explain this kind of behavior?
Now hold that in mind and take a look at
our world on Earth.
If you look at the realm of art, you
will see that the dominant school
represents smears
which Maryanne Suriri divides into two
categories. The neat ones and the messy
ones.
You'll see that music, modern music
represents a progression of
unintelligible noises and that a good
deal of modern literature and
unintelligible succession of letters of
the alphabet.
Uh that the theater alternates between
characters in garbage cans and uh taking
part in orgies with the audience.
In the realm of education, you will see
that teachers are militantly against
teaching and in favor of social
adjustment and/or student power, that
they are opposed to facts or the
teaching of laws, that they regard
thinking as abnormal,
and that they tell little Johnny to
express his feelings with the result
that he cannot read.
Uh if you look at the realm of religion,
you will see that there are some 300
waring sects. uh all claiming their
insight into the appropriate other
dimension by means of revelation.
And then one of the crucial conflicts in
the field is in the between the orient
where they worship various types of
animal and the west where they worship
the pope.
uh you'll see that the latest uh
development in Christian theology in
avowedly Christian theology is atheism
of the view that God is dead and in the
age of atomic energy and space travel we
hear uh excerpts from Genesis broadcast
from outer space.
If you look to the realm of science,
modern science, one school tells us that
cause and effect no longer holds.
Another tells us that the theory of
light has refuted the law of identity.
Most all of them tell us that science is
based on arbitrary presuppositions just
like religion and no more objectively
valid. Many tell us that there are no
such thing as laws, simply statistics.
And uh a few chime in that but one of
the latest discoveries is that electrons
can move from one place to the other
without traversing the space in between.
This is a brief sample. What are the net
results of this rampant irrationality?
Well, if you look at it psychologically,
you will see that the percentage of
neurosis and psychosis in the west has
reached epidemic proportions. If you
look at it politically, you will see the
escalating violence,
the uh threat of nuclear war, the
spreading worldwide slavery,
the vicious, senseless political
murders,
and the inexraable march on the part of
the West toward some version of fascism
or communism.
If you want a philosophic barometer of
the state of a culture,
there are three questions that will tell
it to you. What do people regard as
certain? What do they regard as
realistic? And what do they regard as
human?
We are told today that nothing is
certain but death and taxes.
And the skeptics aren't even sure of
that.
We are told that the characters of
Tennessee Williams or the ones
inhabiting garbage cans are realistic,
but Siranor de Berserak is not.
We would be told that Elanor Roosevelt
is human, but John G is not.
Now, I submit that this is crazier than
the example of Mars that I began with
and that the question therefore is why.
But it's more complex than that because
there are great things, good things,
rational things in the world and
particularly in western civilization.
There are the rational elements left in
modern science which is an enormous
achievement.
There is the legacy of the industrial
revolution.
There is the remnants of America's
individualist political heritage and the
remnants of 19th century romantic art
side by side with all the rest.
How are we to understand it all? How are
we to understand such an incredible
mixture? If you want a symbol that is no
more eloquent than 10,000 others that
could be used, what I think of myself
as a symbol of this mixture is a New
York City skyscraper with everything
that implies with a 13th story labeled
because 13 is an unlucky number.
This is a symbol of the mixture of
modern technology and ancient
numerological mysticism.
Now why? There have been better periods
in the past. Why didn't they last? Where
will we look for an explanation of it
all? The answer is the history of
philosophy.
If you want to know why, consider an
analogy. Suppose that you were a
psychotherapist and you had a patient,
an individual of mixed premises, partly
rational, partly irrational, and he was
accordingly tortured, stumbling,
groping. And you want to understand him.
The first thing you would have to do is
understand the cause of his troubles.
You'd have to understand what are his
bad premises and why he holds them, how
he came to hold them. And then you would
have to guide him to uproot his bad
premises and substitute correct ones in
theirstead.
To do this, the crucial thing you would
have to do is probe the patient's past
because his present can be fully
understood only as a development and
resultant of his past. Because he is one
continuous entity, he builds conclusions
on conclusions. And to understand the
crucial events in his past life is
therefore urgent. You have to understand
those events, the conclusions he drew
from them. You have to see how and why
across the course of his development he
was led to form and accept certain
errors and then to build upon them
thereby compounding his original
problems progressively stifling his
better premises making himself more and
more twisted confused helpless. In a
word you would have to reconstruct the
main points of the man's intellectual
development from childhood on.
Now this analogy applies to an entire
culture. The standin for the neurotic of
mixed premises is western civilization.
The world you live in. The standin for
the psychiatrist is each one of you. You
live in this culture. Your lives and
futures depend in thousands of ways on
its future. If you pursue values in this
world, you have a responsibility to your
own lives and values to correct the
course of the world to put it on the
right track again.
To fight for your values in a world such
as ours, you must regard yourself as the
psychotherapist of an entire culture.
And just as in the case of an
individual, so and even more so in the
case of an entire civilization, it
develops across time. Its present state
at any given time cannot be understood
except as an outgrowth from its past.
The errors of today are built on the
errors of the last century and they in
turn on the previous and so on back to
the childhood of the western world which
is ancient Greece to understand what
exactly are the root errors of today's
world why these errors developed how how
they clashed with and are progressively
submerging its good premises and
therefore to understand what to do to
cure the patient you have to reconstru
construct the intellectual history of
the western world.
I don't want to take the time now to
give you many examples. I'll give you
just schematically one. Consider the
phenomenon of progressive education to
which I alluded. How would you explain
that except by reference to John Dwey?
But Dwey simply applied to education the
principles of William James. And James
simply made an obvious deduction from
Hegel. And Hegel is a minor variant on
Kant. And Kant was trying to answer
Hume, who was the last consistent
consequence of the trend inaugurated by
Daycart and Loach, who were simply
reformulating in a somewhat more secular
way the principles of Augustine, who was
simply reformulating in a somewhat more
religious way the principles of Plato,
who was trying to answer the dilemma
posed by Heracitis and Parmmenities, who
took off from four sentences of Thales,
with which we are beginning tonight.
The history of philosophy is like a
philosophical psychotherapist's
biographical report of a civilization
and it is therefore a precondition to
understanding and therefore to changing
the nature and present course of the
civilization. That's the first and
primary purpose of any course on the
history of philosophy.
And there is a second. The history of
philosophy is not like the history of
science. It is not simply of historical
antiquarian interest. It is not a dead
subject.
The only issues that a history of
philosophy properly deals with are
living fundamental issues, perennial
issues of philosophy. And in the course
of a proper history of philosophy, you
have presented to you all the main
positions on all the main questions that
have ever been formulated in western
philosophy. And consequently, it is
valuable in its own terms as an
introduction to the whole subject of
philosophy.
In particular, it's helpful because I
will not only present to you the
conclusions of the various philosophers,
but also the arguments that they offer
in favor of these conclusions. Almost
all of the philosophic errors which are
undermining the world were originally
and still today are advanced by their
supporters with an array of arguments
claiming to prove that the viewpoint in
question is true. And in fact, these
viewpoints could not have acquired the
power that they have over people's minds
if they didn't have this structure of
apparently supporting arguments, which
gives the errors at least the appearance
of plausibility and rationality. So if
you are to fight the errors, you have to
know clearly the main arguments advanced
for them. You have to in effect hear the
devil's case presented as strongly as
that case permits, which is not too
strong, but still
You have to be sure you know on each
issue what really is true and what is
wrong with the arguments advanced for
the erroneous view. If you don't know
this, then you are not in a position to
fight successfully against the errors.
And therefore I am going to in each case
present as strongly as I can the
arguments by which the various views are
defended by their supporters
particularly those arguments which are
still widespread in terms of their
public acceptance today and at the
appropriate point I will present to you
the criticism in each case where
objectivism disagrees. For the o opening
lectures I will defer all criticism. My
criticisms will essentially come either
in the section on Aristotle who took
care of a great many errors or in the
last lecture on the objectivist answer
where I'll take care of everything that
hasn't been covered up to that point. In
the end, therefore, I hope you have not
only an increased understanding of the
causes of today's world, but a
philosophic arsenal to help you combat
successfully what needs combating and to
defend what needs defending.
Now, this is a history of philosophy.
So, it will be appropriate very briefly
to tell you what philosophy consists of.
I will not take time to dictate these
slowly. If anyone wants these exact
definitions, ask during the question
period and I'll take the time there. The
word philosophy comes from two Greek
words. Fellain meaning to love and
Sophia meaning wisdom. So ethmologically
it means the love of wisdom. And at the
very beginning uh it was the subject
which you were in. If you were in
anything, there was no other subject.
Anybody who loved wisdom and wanted to
acquire knowledge was by that fact a
lover of wisdom. He was a philosopher.
Uh the ancient philosophers therefore
all had views on things that we would
not now regard as philosophy but as
science such as physics, mathematics,
biology etc. But progressively as each
of these disciplines acquired a certain
stock of information on its own, it
split off and set up shop on its own.
mathematics was the first to do so and
subsequently many hundreds of years
later physics and chemistry and so on.
Uh therefore what is philosophy as we
use the term today? Well essentially it
consists of five main divisions. One is
metaphysics and that is the branch of
philosophy which studies the nature of
the universe as a whole. Wh
metaphysics
embraces two types of question.
One, what are the main ingredients of
the universe?
Is there another dimension or only this
one? Is there only matter or is there
also mind or is there only mind or what?
And a second type of question under
metaphysics, are there any laws which
are true of everything which exists of
everything? For instance, some
philosophers say the law of cause and
effect is true of everything and
therefore is metaphysical.
Epistemology,
the branch of philosophy which defines
the nature and means of human knowledge.
It is concerned with all questions on
the order, how do you know? You know
what does knowledge begin with? Are the
senses valid? Does man have some means
of knowledge over and above the senses?
For instance, reason? If so, what is
reason? How does it operate? If you say
by logic, what does it mean to be
logical? If you say by concepts, what
are concepts and how are they related to
sense experience? If you say man has
some faculty of knowledge over and above
reason and the senses, then what
faculty? for instance, faith,
revelation, LSD,
women's intuition, etc. What are the the
claims of any of those candidates to
means of uh knowledge? Can man acquire
knowledge? Is there anything outside his
province of knowledge etc. All that is
epistemology.
Now there is an offshoot of metaphysics
and epistemology
uh which is helpful to know just for
purposes of ancient philosophy and
that's something we can call
philosophical psychology. It's not
really a separate branch of philosophy.
It really is the application of
metaphysics and epistemology to a
philosopher's view of the nature of man.
The basic philosophical nature of man.
Not experimental observations which
would be scientific psychology but
philosophical psychology. And that would
deal with such questions as does man
have free will or is he determined? What
is the relationship between reason and
emotions? Uh things of that order. Uh we
will in presenting Plato and Aristotle I
will present their views of man under
the title of their psychology. Although
if you want you can call that simply the
application of their metaphysics and
epistemology to the theory of the nature
of man. Then there is of course ethics
or morality. I'll use the two terms as
synonymous and uh as an audience of
students of objectivism, you surely know
what that is. The branch of philosophy
concerned to define uh a code of values
to guide human choices and actions.
Then there is politics,
the application of ethics to social
questions, the branch of philosophy
which defines the proper nature of
society and particularly the proper
functions of government. And you of
course know what that is. And then there
is aesthetics which is the uh branch of
philosophy concerned with art. The
nature and purpose of art and the
standards by which it is to be
objectively evaluated. We will not
discuss aesthetics except very
peripherilally in this course. We'll
concentrate on the big four. Metaphysics
and epistemology being the base of any
philosophy. Ethics being the application
to how an individual should live.
Politics being the application of ethics
to social questions. Philosophy
therefore really consists of three basic
questions. What is there? That's
metaphysics. How do you know? That's
epistemology. And so on. That's ethics
and politics.
If you wanted an overall definition of
philosophy, I would simply repeat it all
in one sentence as follows. Philosophy
is the subject which studies the nature
of the universe and of man's means of
knowing the universe and which on this
basis provides a code of values to guide
human actions and institutions.
Now in the early days of philosophy
they did not have complete systems of
philosophy with organized views in all
of these branches. They had only
isolated ideas on separate individual
questions at least so far as we know
from the few fragments that remain to
us. The first overall systematic
philosopher who has views of an
organized kind in every branch is Plato
and thereafter all major philosophers
have systematic philosophers.
Now, one more word before we plunge in
regarding the chronological division of
the history of philosophy so you have a
perspective to know what's coming. So
you don't sit in suspense wondering
who's coming next.
The history of philosophy is divided
into three broad periods. Ancient,
medieval, and modern.
Ancient is dated from the 6th century BC
until about the 6th century AD. a period
of about 10,200 years.
Uh it's officially declared to be dead
in 529 AD when all of the pagan i.e.
non-Christian schools were formally
closed and non-Christian philosophy was
prohibited in the west.
Medieval philosophy is the period when
Christian philosophy dominates the scene
and it picks up two or 30 hundred years
after Jesus around the fourth fifth
century AD and uh dominates the field
entirely until the Renaissance in the
15th century AD. So there's a thousand
years and then modern philosophy is the
period from the Renaissance 15th century
to the present. By convention, the
present century, the one in which you
live, is called contemporary philosophy,
which we will not get to in this course
since we stop in the 18th century. Now,
you see that gives us a big program. We
have about 2400 years to cover from the
6th BC to the 1800s. And we have 12
lectures. So, that averages 200 years
per lecture. We can be thankful though
for the dark ages because we'll cover
hundreds in one second.
Now within ancient philosophy there are
four main divisions.
There are a group of people of whom we
know very little that came before
Socrates and who are therefore very
logically called the ptocratics.
Uh in most of these people we do not
know when they were born or when they
died but simply that they were alive and
kicking in some year and that is called
their floor you f l o r ui t which means
they were flourishing in this year and
that's you assume that they were born 30
or 40 or 50 years earlier and or died 30
or 40 50 years after it. Uh we don't
have any connected works from this
period except little excerpts. we have
fragments from the father of philosophy
thealis we have four sentences from
Heracitis we have 130 uh and so on and
that of course is enormously difficult
to interpret but we don't have to worry
about the academic difficulties there
and we'll be on those tonight and next
week then we come to two philosophers
who are really a unit Socrates who is
469 to 399 BC Plato's teacher and then
Plato 427 to 347 BC so I say we'll treat
those as one unit regarding Socrates as
simply uh a man who gave Plato some very
uh seinal ideas which he proceeded to
develop. Then uh Aristotle 384 to 322 BC
Plato's pupil for 20 years who then
developed a philosophic system
diametrically opposed to Plato and then
a group of second rate philosophers
stretching across hundreds of years as
ancient philosophy waned and died. uh
they include the followers of Epicurus,
the Stoics, Skeptics, Neoplatonists and
Sunday others. And they are collectively
called the post Aristotilians, the
winding up phase of ancient philosophy
and we cover all of those in one evening
here.
Medieval philosophy has two main eras.
There is uh the Augustinian period.
Augustine himself at 354 to 430 AD and
he represents the attempt to develop
Christianity on a platonist basis and
that dominates the scene for hundreds
and hundreds of years until about the
time of the second main era which is the
toistic era of medieval philosophy under
the influence of Thomas Aquinus who is
1225 to 1274 and he represents the
attempt to combine Christianity with the
philosophy of Aristotle
thereby as we shall see opening the door
to the collapse of Christian influence
and the development of the Renaissance.
The 15th and 16th centuries have nothing
of any interest. They simply represent
the time when the modern world went back
to school to study ancient philosophy
uh and find out what had happened that
they had lost knowledge of during the
medieval period. So modern philosophy of
any distinctive kind begins again in the
17th century and divides into two famous
schools. the one fathered by Renee
Decart in the 17th century uh and uh we
will see him and his followers that's
called the rationalist school I'll
explain the term as we get there and the
one followed by John Lockach reaching
its climax in David Hume the final one
in this course the empiricist school
that is a chronological survey of what
to expect
would you elaborate on the definition of
philosophy explaining why the five main
branches you included are grouped
together while psychology, mathematics,
etc. are omitted.
Yes, there are two common denominators
to the five main branches. One is the
universality of their scope and the
second is their necessity as guides to
human action any human action.
Philosophy is above all else the all
embracing subject. Metaphysics studies
the entire universe. Not just any one
species or subdivision, not just matter
or mind or life, but everything.
Epistemology does not ask how do you
acquire knowledge of physics or
chemistry or astronomy or of cooking but
of everything. And the same for the
other branches. Ethics does not ask how
should a tailor, a butcher or a candle
maker live, but how should any man live?
How should any government be organized?
How should any work of art be judged? In
this sense, philosophy, the essential
element of all of them is that they are
universal, not specialized.
Which is why philosophy deals with the
kind of issues that anybody can think
about. It does not require specialized
information uh of one particular
subcategory of reality. The other common
denominator is they are all these
branches that I mentioned provide
indispensable guides to action.
Metaphysics of course does not directly
tell you how to live but it gives you
the precondition the nature of reality.
But every other branch tells you how to
act. Epistemology says do this if you
want to know. Ethics says do this in
your choices. Politics says do this in
your government. Aesthetics says do this
in your art. And therefore the essence
of philosophy is telling man how to
function conceptually, existentially,
socially, aesthetically.
Those are the two common denominators.
In contrast, all the so-called special
sciences, psychology, mathematics, etc.
are either restricted to one subcategory
of reality like human behavior which
psychology used to describe today
describes rats or mathematics which is
restricted to quantitative relations or
whatever it happens to be and they are
not normative they do not tell you how
you should behave in any field but
simply describe the way things are
yes I better clarify that statement I
said last time that in philosophy no
special knowledge of any one area of
reality was required. I didn't say that
as a defining characteristic but a
consequence of the fact that philosophic
principles are universal. You can find
them anywhere. So it's not that you
don't have to know anything about
reality but wherever you look for
instance whatever you look at it is what
it is. And so you can get the law of
identity from peaches or art or uh
battleships. You see so it's not that
you don't have to look at reality but
you can find philosophic principles
anywhere precisely because they're
universal. Now you raised the question,
well what about aesthetics? Don't you
have to know about music to have a
philosophy of music and about painting
to have a philosophy of painting?
Obviously yes. But then that is already
applied philosophy. That is specialized
philosophy. That is a union of abstract
philosophy which is what I was defining
in a particular field. Now as soon as
you start to apply philosophy to a
particular area, you obviously have to
have specialized knowledge of that area.
If you're going to have a philosophy of
education, epistemology by itself will
not give it to you. It'll give you the
base, but then you have to think what
kind of curriculum is proper and at what
age should children be taught what and
with what motive and etc. If you're
going to have a philosophy of law,
politics will give you the base, but it
won't tell you what should the
constitution say and how many sessions
of congress should there be and how many
houses of congress should there be and
you know who owns the oil rights to what
kind of land and etc. So you have to
know a great deal of particular material
and the same is obviously true in
philosophy of music or philosophy of
science whatever it happens to be. I was
talking about philosophy abstractly
the basic branches not the detailed
applications.
Are philosophical psychology and
epistemology synonyms? No.
Philosophical psychology in the sense
that I use it in this course is the
philosophical theory of the nature of
man. his basic nature and it essentially
includes questions such as does man have
free will or not or is he determined?
Does uh he is he motivated by purpose or
is he simply a mechanistic being?
Uh are emotions basically opposite to
the reason or is there some relationship
between the two etc. Now all of those
questions in a way are really uh
resolved in metaphysics and
epistemology. So philosophical
psychology as we use the term in this
course is simply the application to the
theory of man of your conclusions in
metaphysics and epistemology. It's not
really a separate subject. It's just a
convenient pedagogical uh device.
Epistemology of course is specifically
the theory of the nature and means of
knowledge. It will have an effect on
your view of man but is not exactly the
same thing. It will have a crucial
effect. If you say that reason is
impotent, you'll have a sophist type
view of man or some equivalent. But that
doesn't mean that it's exactly the same
thing.
Do I recommend any history of philosophy
text for this course?
Well, I can recommend readings. Uh I
wouldn't want to go in great length for
it with it, but I'd be certainly happy
to recommend readings that you can do if
you wish. The course doesn't presuppose
them. The best introductory history of
philosophy that I know is a history of
western philosophy by WT Jones.
It comes out in a four volume paperback
edition published by Hardcourt Brace
and it covers the waterfront for
complete beginners. Uh and it is
perfectly respectable.
Uh another good and much shorter one is
by Gordon H. Clark called Thales to Dwey
and it is the one that I quoted from
which has that excellent summary of
Heracletus's river
that it why it doesn't exist.
Uh the two unquestionably best histories
of philosophy ever written, but they are
not for beginners, but they are without
question the best is uh Amil Brer,
the famous French historian of
philosophy,
uh who wrote uh enormously lucid
detailed work covering everything right
until the time of his death. and that
has been put out by the University of
Chicago Press in a whole series of
paperbacks.
And of course, my own personal favorite,
uh, Vilhelm Vindelbond,
a history of philosophy
and not a history of ancient philosophy.
That's a different one of his, which is
good, but it's not the one I have in
mind, which I regard as a truly
superlative history of philosophy. And I
would say without any doubt that I
learned more history of philosophy from
Vindelbond than all the rest put
together. but it is difficult reading
not because it's unclear but because
it's enormously compressed and uh I
average the first time around about 45
minutes for one side of a page to follow
it.
Um if you want to do any readings in
uh particular periods there are many
good histories simply of ancient
philosophy which are much more detailed.
I think off hand of Joseph Owens a
history of ancient western philosophy
Appleton century a very scholarly
detailed there is the massive multi-
volume thick multiolume work by Guthrie
uh the last I heard he had three volumes
out on the prescratics alone I think uh
and that will really tell you everything
if you have that kind of passionate
interest in it
uh uh there are all sorts of anthologies
which give you little excerpts fairly
generous excerpts
of any philosopher or all of them that's
wide open
uh there are many works on the
prescratics but in unless you ask me for
them particularly I wouldn't uh urge you
to read any particular one of them
unless you have a special interest
uh you should certainly if you want to
do any reading read some of Plato's
famous dialogue They're all collected in
one volume called the collected
dialogues of Plato edited by Hamilton
and Kairens and that's Pantheon books
and that's a one volume edition of
everything of Plato's
uh
I don't think it's need we need go on
there's Richard McKeon's edition of the
works of Aristotle or you can get the
whole 12 volume Oxford series if you
want and uh if you want to read The
Confessions of St. Augustine. The best
translation is by Pine Coffin.
Um
there's also the pocket Aquinus if you
want
edited by Father Copelston,
but uh that should hold you for a while.